---
layout: post
title:  "AI" 
date:   2024-10-31 3:06:34 -0700
categories: 
published: False
---

## Part 1: The End of History
## Kojéve 

### Introduction to the Reading of Hegel
- pg 5-6 definition of "Human Desire" as opposed to animal desire, and the prerequisite to self-consciousness is basically Girardian mimesis
- 8: The necessity of Master and Slave, since if everyone fought to the death for recognition, there would be no one left to recognize the other
- 

For Hegel, what made man distinct from animals was his ability to desire that which does not exist, which for Hegel was another Desire. To desire another Desire is to want to have one's "values" recognized as another's "values" (pg 7). Even further, what makes man unique is the willingness to fight to the death for such recognition. The fight for recognition confers no biological, survivial, or natural value, and thus makes man unique, otherwise man would be no different to animal.

The fight for recognition can end in three ways.
- Both die, in which case, well, nothing much happens,
- One dies, leaving the other unsatisfies since there is no one left to grant recognition,
- One yields to the other.
The latter is what kick starts the Hegel's Universal History.

The Master-Slave dialectic begins when one yields to the other. The Master is the one who had the balls to risk his life for something completely useless, while the Slave chose not to do so. However, such a victory is still not fully satisfying for the Master, since even though he is recognized by another, the other has now become not quite his equal, and so such recognition is not really worth shit. 

For Hegel, it is the Slave that drives History forwards. The Master is stuck in the same place. He may perhaps challenge other Masters to more fights to the death over recognition, but that would not change what he is: one who risks his life over recognition. It is only the Slave that may overcome himself. 

Stoicism -> Skepticism -> Christianity -> Atheism (Universal Homogenuous State)


### End of History and The Last Man
- gives both an economic/scientific explanation but also Hegelian one for Liberal Democracy (freedom and equality)
- 1) Our Pessimism:
    - fall of the soviet union, especially abrupt, was taken by Fukuyama as a sign to be more optimistic about liberal democracy
- 2) Weakness of Strong States I:
    - 15: The critical weakness that eventually toppled these strong states was in the last analysis a failure of legitimacy—that is, a crisis on the level of ideas. Legitimacy is not justice or right in an ab­ solute sense; it is a relative concept that exists in people's subjec­ tive perceptions. All regimes capable of effective action must be based on some principle of legitimacy.1
    - 17: Fascism suffered, one might say, from an internal con- tradiction: its very emphasis on militarism and war led it inevitably into a self-destructive conflict with the international system. A s a result, it has not been a serious ideological competitor to liberal democracy since the end of the Second World War.
    - 18: Legitimate regimes have a fund of goodwill that excuses them from short-term mistakes, even serious ones, and failure can be expiated by the removal of a prime minister or cabinet. In illegit­ imate regimes, on the other hand, failure frequently precipitates an overturning of the regime itself.
        - sacrifice/scapegoat
    - To what extent was the apparent spread of democracy just the immense soft (backed by even larger hard) power of the United States?
- 3) Weakness of Strong States II:
    - 34: After the events of 1989,China has become just another Asian authoritarian state. It lacks internal legitimacy for a broad sector of its own elite, particularly among the young who will someday inherit the country, and is not guided by a coherent ideology. The PRC will no longer serve as a model for revolutionaries around the world, as it once did under Mao, all the more so when it is compared to the fast-growing capitalist states of the region.
- 4) The Worldwide Liberal Revolution:
    - 39: The absence of legitimate authority has meant that when an authoritarian government met with failure in some area of policy, there was no higher principle to which the regime could appeal. Some have compared legitimacy to a kind of cash reserve. All governments, democratic and authoritarian, have their ups and downs; but only legitimate governments have this reserve to draw on in times of crisis.
        - could it be also the case that the "strong" governments simply weren't strong enough?
    - 43: In judging which countries are democratic, we will use a strictly formal definition of democracy. A country is democratic if it grants its people the right to choose their own government through periodic, secret-ballot, multi-party elections,5 on the basis of universal and equal adult suffrage
    - 45: But the fact that there will be setbacks and disappointments in the process of democratization, or that not every market economy will prosper, should not distract us from the larger pattern that is emerging in world history. The apparent number of choices that countries face in determining how they will organize themselves politically and economically has been diminishing over time. Of the different types of regimes that have emerged in the course of human history, from monarchies and aristocracies, to religious theocracies, to the fascist and communist dictatorships of this cen­ tury, the only form of government that has survived intact to the end of the twentieth century has been liberal democracy.
    - 46: Despite the power demonstrated by Islam in its current re­ vival, however, it remains the case that this religion has virtually no appeal outside those areas that were culturally Islamic to begin with. The days of Islam's cultural conquests, it would seem, are over: it can win back lapsed adherents, but has no resonance for young people in Berlin, Tokyo, or Moscow. And while nearly a billion people are culturally Islamic—one-fifth of the world's population—they cannot challenge liberal democracy on its own territory on the level of ideas.9 Indeed, the Islamic world would seem more vulnerable to liberal ideas in the long run than the reverse, since such liberalism has attracted numerous and power­ ful Muslim adherents over the past century and a half. Part of the reason for the current, fundamentalist revival is the strength of the perceived threat from liberal, Western values to traditional Islamic societies.
    - 48: It is true that democracies have been relatively rare in human history, so rare that before 1776 there was not a single one in existence anywhere in the world. [...] What is significant, however, is not the frequency or length of occurrence, but the trend: in the developed world, we would as little expect to see the disappearance of cities or cars in the near future as we would the re-emergence of slavery.
- 5) An Idea for a Universal History:
    - 62: While Hegel may not have been the first philosopher to write about history, he was the first historicist philosopher—that is, a philosopher who believed in the essential historical relativity of truth
- 6) The Mechanism of Desire:
    - 72: For without the possi­bility of a total historical forgetting, each successive cycle would build, if only in small ways, on the experiences of earlier ones.
    - 73: The possibility of war is a great force for the rationalization of societies, and for the creation of uniform social structures across cultures. Any state that hopes to maintain its political autonomy is forced to adopt the technology of its enemies and rivals.
        - not with Nukes. Once you have them it seems to be less so
    - 81: If the discovery of modern natural science produces direc­tional history, the question naturally arises, Can it be un-invented? Can the scientific method cease to dominate our lives, and is it possible for industrialized societies to return to pre-modern, pre- scientific ones? Is the directionality of history, in short, reversible?
        - Unabomber's answer: yes.
- 7) No Barbarians at the Gate:
    - Technology will always emerge as long as there are remnants or memory of it, leading to the same direction of history
- 8) Accumulation Without End:
    - Technology necessitates a capitalist/more free society vs managed economy
    - requires market mechanisms
- 9) The Victory of the VCR:
    - shallow arguments against Mercantilism 
    - Asian countries vs Latin American ones
        - Asian countries did not practice protectionist stuff so developed much faster then Latin American ones
        - What else other than economic policy could have been a big difference I wonder
- 10) In the Land of Education
    - Edge case: 112: The only apparent regional anomaly is the Middle East, which possesses no stable democracies, and yet contains a number of states with per capita incomes on a European or Asian level. But this is easily explained by oil: income from petroleum has permit­ ted states like Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Iran, and the UAE to acquire the trappings of modernity—automobiles, VCRs, Mirage fighter- bombers, and the like—without having had their societies go through the social transformations that come when such wealth is generated by the labor of their populations.
    - 113: Democracy, according to this line of argument, is more func­ tional than dictatorship because many of the conflicts that develop between these emerging social groups have to be adjudicated ei­ ther in the legal system or, ultimately, in the political system.1 4 The market alone cannot determine the appropriate level and location of public infrastructure investment, or rules for the set­ tlement of labor disputes, or the degree of airline and trucking...
        - Almost a Landian take, but concluded the wrong thing...
    - 115: But once the regime's founders have passed on, there is no guarantee that their successors will enjoy a comparable degree of authority, or even that they will be mini­ mally competent at running the country.
        - See Schmitt's "The Leviathan in the State Theory of Thomas Hobbes"
    - 115: Under either the left-wing communist or right-wing authoritarian ver­ sions of this argument, democracy does not arise because anybody necessarily wants it, but rather as a byproduct of elite struggle.
        - To what extent were the "democracies" that came out of the 20th century merely monarchies decaying into oligarchies under the legitimizing veil of "Democracy"?
    - Modern natural science and economic development is insufficient to explain the move to liberal democracy, as (old) Taiwan's move to semicondunctors amd general semi-planned economies work to spur growth as well
- 11) A Former Question Answered:
    - 128: On the other hand, a Universal His­ tory need not justify every tyrannical regime and every war to expose a meaningful larger pattern in human evolution. The power and long-term regularity of that evolutionary process is not diminished if we admit that it was subject to large and apparently unexplainable discontinuities, any more than the biological theory of evolution is undermined by the fact of the sudden extinction of the dinosaurs.
- 12) No Democracy without Democrats:
    - How can we tell if history is at an end? When there are no more contradictions. How can we tell if there are no more contradictions? When the political system satisfies "man as man".
- 13) In the Beginning, the Battle to the Death for Pure Prestige:
    - 145: We inhabitants of liberal democratic countries are by now so used to accounts of current events that reduce motivation to economic causes, so thoroughly bourgeois in our own perceptions, that we are frequently surprised to discover how totally non-economic most political life is. Indeed, we do not even have a corrimon vocabulary for talking about the prideful and assertive side of human nature that is responsible for driving most wars and po­ litical conflicts. The "struggle for recognition" is a concept as old as political philosophy, and refers to a phenomenon coterminous with political life itself.
        - Similar to Thiel, Fukuyama asserts that homo-economicus is insufficient
- 14) The First Man:
    - The difference between Hegel and Hobbes/Locke was his respect for the aristocratic master's way of life, which Hobbes and Locke both rejected
- 15) A Vacation in Bulgaria:
    - 
- 16) The Beast With Red Cheaks:
    - 171: Thymos as it emerges in the Republic or in Havel's account of the
    greengrocer constitutes something like an innate human sense of justice, and as such is the psychological seat of all the noble virtues like selflessness, idealism, morality, self-sacrifice, courage, and honorability. Thymos provides an all-powerful emotional support to the process of valuing and evaluating, and allows human beings to overcome their most powerful natural instincts for the sake of what they believe is right or just.
    - Fukuyama brings attention to the very large part that *thymos* played in revolutions
        - One can ask the Aristotelian question of whether this a lot of what we saw in the 20th century is an overstimulation of *thymos*, fomented by America's immense soft power (which is of course backed by even larger hard power). 
        - Would the End of History apply if *thymos* was kept at a healthy moderation?
- 17) The Rise and Fall of Thymos:
    - 188: An American politician could harbor ambitions to be a Caesar or a Napoleon, but the system would allow him or her to be no more than a Jimmy Carter or Ronald Reagan—hemmed in by powerful institutional constraints and political forces on all sides, and forced to realize their ambition by being the people's "servant" rather than their master.
        - FDR?
- 18) Lordship and Bondage:
    - Christianity as a psycology of Slaves. However its freedom could never be achieved in this life, but the next.
    - As a synthesis between Particularity and Universality, out of which the "Individual" is born.
        - Everyone is unique in the same way...
- 19) The Universal and Homogenuous State:
    - 199: For Hegel, the French Revolution was the event that took the Christian vision of a free and equal society, and implemented it here on earth. In making this revolution, the former slaves risked their lives, and in so doing proved that they had overcome the very fear of death that had served originally to define them as slaves.
    - 200: "For Hegel, by contrast, liberal society is a reciprocal and equal agreement among citizens to mutually recognize each other. If Hobbesian or Lockean liberalism can be interpreted as the pursuit of rational self-interest, Hegelian "liberalism" can be seen as the pursuit of rational recognition, that is, recognition on a universal basis in which the dignity of each person as a free and autono­ mous human being is recognized by all. What is at stake for us when we choose to live in a liberal democracy is not merely the fact that it allows us the freedom to make money and satisfy the desiring parts of our souls. The more important and ultimately more satisfying thing it provides us is recognition of our dignity. Life in a liberal democracy is potentially the road to great material abundance, but it also shows us the way to the completely non- material end of recognition of our freedom. The liberal demo­ cratic state values us at our own sense of self-worth. Thus both the desiring and thymotic parts of our souls find satisfaction."
    - 203: Popular self-government abolishes the distinction between masters and slaves; everyone is entitled to at least some share in the role of master. Mastery now takes the form of the promulgation of democratically determined laws, that is, sets of universal rules by which man self-consciously masters himself.
        - What's the relationship between creditor and debtor? What are the only kind of loans that are not dischargeable in bankrupcy today? Who are the creditors of such loans?
- 20) The Coldest of All Cold Monsters:
    - 212: Other nations like Germany have had terrible diffi­ culties achieving stable democracy, despite their firm rooting in the W estern European tradition, while France, the birthplace of liberty and equality, has seen five different democratic republics come and go since 1789.These cases stand in sharp contrast to the experience of most democracies of Anglo-Saxon origin, which have had a relatively easy time maintaining the stability of their institutions.
        - That's mostly because we don't number our republics... Lincoln, FDR...
    - 213: Liberal democracy in its Anglo-Saxon variant represents the emergence of a kind of cold calculation at the expense of earlier moral and cultural horizons.
        - Thiel would argue that it was less rational, and a more Girardian "sacrificial" explanation would explain the failures, i.e. the fruits of sacrifice are limited...
    - 215: For democracy to work, however, citizens of democratic states must forget the instrumental roots of their values, and develop a certain irrational thymotic pride in their political system and a way of life.
        - Forget the founding of the city. Incomptible with Girard?
- 21) The Thymotic Origins of Work:
    - Cultural, religious, "irrational thymos" explains the differences between liberal democracies
- 22) Empires of Resentment, Empires of Deference:
    - 240: In Japan, by contrast, society as a whole tends to regard itself as a single, large group with a single, stable source of authority. The emphasis on group harmony tends to push open confrontation to the fringes of politics; there is no alternation of political parties in power based on clashes over "issues," but rather the decades-long dominance of the Liberal Democratic party (LDP).
        - Could it be because Japan was a conquered nation? Why does the US have troops in Okinawa again?
- 23) The Unreality of "Realism":
    - 

Straussian Reading of Fukuyama: https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/12/18/francis-fukuyama-postmodern-radicalism-democracy/


## Part 2: The Straussian Moment
- Straussian Moment
    - It is curious why Thiel chose to focus on Locke instead of Hobbes
        - Strauss appeared to have viewed Hobbes as the father of Liberalism, and not Locke. Locke was, in the final analysis, just a less autistic Hobbes (he knew his audience)
        - Seems like Thiel's skepticism is with homo-economicus and not with Liberalism itself? He does call himself a "libertarian"
    - If Modernity and Liberalism is not working, the natural reaction is to go back to classical virtues. So then why were the classical virtues supplanted?     
    - I see seems like Locke and the Enlightenment was a "sacrificing" of asking the questions of human nature as such questions caused too much violence (Girardian perspective)
        - See Strauss's Work on Locke
    - In some sense, an "End of History" is a kind of stagnation that is incompatible with Girardian revelation. Civilization will need to "outrun" such revelation, especially in the age of such violence multipliers (technology)

    - Schmitt: 
        - A natural science formulation of Schmitt's Political Theology could be something like: Given that there is nothing that is worthing dying for, what is the probability that such life is meaningful, fulfilling, and ultimately *human*?
            - Though it's a formulation Schmitt would probably himself reject
        
    

Summary:
For Thiel the End of History came to an abrupt end on September 11, 2001. 

- it appears that political philosophy and AI have met
    - Schmitt's The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)
        - Age of Techocity or smthing
    - Curious inversion:
        - Schmitt saw the complete power over nature as the sign of the Anti-Christ
        - Thiel has commented that it's the decelerationists who keep preaching the end-times that appear more like the anti-christ
        - seems like a lot are animated to accelerate due to the complete odiousness of the decels
            - most are somewhat Aristotelian and seek to fulfill their noble capacities
            - their direction is most away/against decels
        - why are decels odious? Why do the odious want deceleration?
        - Curious also in the way of Straussian empiricism (somewhere in Natural right and history, probably in the Classical chapter. Thomas? Revelation maybe)

- Hidden Dialogue: "World history is not at an end"
    - history starting once more?

## Intermezzo: Industrial Society and its Future
I promise we'll get to AI soon enough, but allow me this small detour.

Central to Thiel's philosophy is progress, and in particular, progress embodied by technology. 

There is another that thought about technology and its future.

## Part 3: Techno-Capital
- Andreesen's manifesto
    - what's notably not mentioned is Strauss and Schmitt
    - which is quite Straussian (the first rule of Strauss club is...)
    - if we notice the slight contradiction at the end, i.e. "this is not political" but then declaring the enemy ("the high point of great politics is the clear recognition of the enemy as the enemy")
    - It's hard to imagine Andreesen -- who's in the vicinity of Thiel -- not knowing what he's doing
    - Does the anti-anti-christ == christ?
    - Virulent Optimism


- Where and how are the majority of DJI drones being deployed again?

- It is a peculiarity why the meaning of life has been ascribed to simply "being happy". 




History starting up once more:
- End of history, progressing slowing to a halt, big tech companies hoarding cash (having no idea what to deploy it on) --> huge capex on GPUs and Infra etc.
- Andreesen's friend-enemy distinction
- Thiel's thesis of technology vs anti-thesis of the world-state/anti-christ, with no obvious synthesis..
    - history has not ended just yet
- Thiel the political philosopher, Andreesen the Political Theologian
- are *you* not entertained?