---
layout: post
title:  "[Book Notes] Political Theology" 
date:   2024-10-27 3:06:34 -0700
categories: 
published: False
---

# 1) Definition of Sovereignty
- pg 5: "Sovereign is he who decides on the exception."
- 6 What is argued about is the concrete application, and that means who decides in a situation of conflict what constitutes the public interest or interest of the state, public safety and order, le salut public, and so on.
- pg 6: "The exception, which is not codified in the existing legal order, can at best be characterized as a case of extreme peril, a danger to the existence of the state, or the like. But it cannot be circumscribed factually and made to conform to a preformed law."
- 7 If such action is not subject to controls, if it is not hampered in some way by checks and balances, as is the case in a liberal constitution, then it is clear who the sovereign is. He decides whether there is an extreme emergency as well as what must be done to eliminate it. Although he stands outside the normally valid legal system, he nevertheless belongs to it, for it is he who must decide whether the constitution needs to be suspended in its entirety.
- pg 7: "But whether the extreme exception can be banished from the world is not a juristic question. Whether one has confidence and hope that it can be eliminated depends on philosophical, especially on philosophical-historical or metaphysical, convictions."
- "sovereignty is the absolute and perpetual power of a republic”). 
    - ofted cited as sovereignty in liberalism
- 8 To what extent is the sovereign bound to laws, and to what extent is he responsible to the estates?
    - In general, according to him, the prince is duty bound toward the estates or the people only to the extent of fulfilling his promise in the interest of the people; he is not so bound under conditions of urgent necessity.
    - The decisive point about Bodin’s concept is that by referring to the emergency, he reduced his analysis of the relationships between prince and estates to a simple either/ or. This is what is truly impressive in his definition of sovereignty; by considering sovereignty to be indivisible, he finally settled the question of power in the state.
    - Bodin asked if the commitments of the prince to the estates or the people dissolve his sovereignty. He answered by referring to the case in which it becomes necessary to violate such commitments, to change laws or to suspend them entirely according to the requirements of a situation, a time, and a people. If in such cases the prince had to consult a senate or the people before he could act, he would have to be prepared to let his subjects dispense with him. Bodin considered this an absurdity because, according to him, the estates were not masters over the laws; they in turn would have to permit their prince to dispense with them.
- 11 This provision corresponds to the development and practice of the liberal constitutional state, which attempts to repress the question of sovereignty by a division and mutual control of competences.
- 12 The existence of the state is undoubted proof of its superiority over the validity of the legal norm. The decision frees itself from all normative ties and becomes in the true sense absolute. The state suspends the law in the exception on the basis of its right of self-preservation, as one would say. The two elements of the concept legal order are then dissolved into independent notions and thereby testify to their conceptual independence.
- 13 The exception is that which cannot be subsumed; it defies general codification, but it simultaneously reveals a specifically juristic element—the decision in absolute purity.
- 13 For a legal order to make sense, a normal situation must exist, and he is sovereign who definitely decides whether this normal situation actually exists.
- 13 All law is “situational law.” The sovereign produces and guarantees the situation in its totality. He has the monopoly over this last decision. Therein resides the essence of the state’s sovereignty, which must be juristically defined correctly, not as the monopoly to coerce or to rule, but as the monopoly to decide. The exception reveals most clearly the essence of the state’s authority. The decision parts here from the legal norm, and (to formulate it paradoxically) authority proves that to produce law it need not be based on law.
- 14 The contemporary theory of the state reveals the interesting spectacle of the two tendencies facing one another, the rationalist tendency, which ignores the emergency, and the natural law tendency, which is interested in the emergency and emanates from an essentially different set of ideas.

# 2) The Problem of Sovereignty as the Problem of the Legal Form and of the Decision
- 17 "On the basis of this principle, the German theory of the state distinguishes between the concept of sovereignty and the concept of the state."
- 17 Nevertheless, the old definition, in phraseological variations, is always repeated: Sovereignty is the highest, legally independent, underived power.
- 17 "In political reality there is no irresistible highest or greatest power that operates according to the certainty of natural law. Power proves nothing in law for the banal reason that Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in agreement with the spirit of his time, formulated as follows: Force is a physical power; the pistol that the robber holds is also a symbol of power."
- 18 The connection of actual power with the legally highest power is the fundamental problem of the concept of sovereignty. All the difficulties reside here. What is necessary is a definition that embraces this basic concept of jurisprudence. Such a definition cannot consist of general tautological predicates but rather must specify the essential juristic elements.
- 18 The old contrast between is and ought, between causal and normative considerations, has been transferred to the contrast of sociology and jurisprudence,
- 20 Let us for now disregard the interesting mathematical assumption that a point must be an order as well as a system and must also be identical with a norm; let us ask another question: On what does the intellectual necessity and objectivity of the various ascriptions with the various points of ascription rest if it does not rest on a positive determination, on a command?
- 21 Unity and purity are easily attained when the basic difficulty is emphatically ignored and when, for formal reasons, everything that contradicts the system is excluded as impure.
- 21 Kelsen solved the problem of the concept of sovereignty by negating it. The result of his deduction is that “the concept of sovereignty must be radically repressed.”
- 22 "The modern idea of the state, according to Krabbe, replaces personal force (of the king, of the authorities) with spiritual power. “We no longer live under the authority of persons, be they natural or artificial (legal) persons, but under the rule of laws, (spiritual) forces. This is the essence of the modern idea of the state.” He continues, “These forces rule in the strictest sense of the word. Precisely because these forces emanate from the spiritual nature of man, they can be obeyed voluntarily.” The basis, the source of the legal order, is “to be found only in men’s feeling or sense of right.” He concludes, “Nothing can be said further about this foundation: It is the only one that is real.”"
- 24 "There exists a tendency toward the reconciliation of law and power through which the otherwise unbearable “state of tension” can be eliminated. The equality of the state with the law is nevertheless veiled in Gierke because, according to him, the state’s lawgiving is only “the last formal seal” the state stamps on the law; it is an “imprint of the state” that has only “external formal value.” It is what Krabbe calls a mere ascertaining of the legal value, which does not belong to the character of law. This is why, according to Gierke, international law can be law even though it lacks state character. If the state is pushed into playing the role of a mere proclaiming herald, then it can no longer be sovereign. On the basis of Gierke’s association theory, Preuss rejected the concept of sovereignty as a residue of the authoritarian state and discovered the community, based on associations and constituted from below, as an organization that did not need a monopoly on power and could thus also manage without sovereignty."
- 25 "Its starting point is that the state needs law and law needs the state; but “law, as the deeper principle, holds the state in check in the final analysis.” The state is the original power of rule, but it is so as the power of order, as the “form” of national life and not an arbitrary force applied by just any authority. What is demanded of this power is that it intervene only when the free individual or associational act proves to be insufficient; it should remain in the background as the ultima ratio."
- 26 "The state should preserve law; it is “guardian, not master,” guardian, not a mere “blind servant,” and “responsible and ultimate guarantor.”"
- 28 What significance can be given to the fact that in the contemporary theory of the state, neo-Kantian formalism has been thrown aside while, at the same time, a form is postulated from an entirely different direction?
- 29 One thing is certain to be recognized in this modern theory of the state: The form should be transferred from the subjective to the objective.
- 29 They agree that all personal elements must be eliminated from the concept of the state. For them, the personal and the command elements belong together. According to Kelsen, the conception of the personal right to command is the intrinsic error in the theory of state sovereignty; because the theory is premised on the subjectivism of command rather than on the objectively valid norm, he characterized the theory of the primacy of the state’s legal order as “subjectivistic” and as a negation of the legal idea.
- 30 All these objections fail to recognize that the conception of personality and its connection with formal authority arose from a specific juristic interest, namely, an especially clear awareness of what the essence of the legal decision entails. Such a decision in the broadest sense belongs to every legal perception. Every legal thought brings a legal idea, which in its purity can never become reality, into another aggregate condition and adds an element that cannot be derived either from the content of the legal idea or from the content of a general positive legal norm that is to be applied. Every concrete juristic decision contains a moment of indifference from the perspective of content, because the juristic deduction is not traceable in the last detail to its premises and because the circumstance that requires a decision remains an independently determining moment. This has nothing to do with the causal and psychological origins of such a decision, even though the abstract decision as such is also of significance, but with the determination of the legal value. The certainty of the decision is, from the perspective of sociology, of particular interest in an age of intense commercial activity because in numerous cases commerce is less concerned with a particular content than with a calculable certainty. (So that I can accommodate myself accordingly, I am often less interested in how a timetable determines times of departure and arrival in a particular case than in its functioning reliably.) Legal communication offers an example of such a concern in the so-called formal strictness of the exchange law. The legal interest in the decision as such should not be mixed up with this kind of calculability. It is rooted in the character of the normative and is derived from the necessity of judging a concrete fact concretely even though what is given as a standard for the judgment is only a legal principle in its general universality. Thus a transformation takes place every time. That the legal idea cannot translate itself independently is evident from the fact that it says nothing about who should apply it. In every transformation there is present an auctoritatis interpositio. A distinctive determination of which individual person or which concrete body can assume such an authority cannot be derived from the mere legal quality of a maxim. This is the difficulty that Krabbe ignored.
- 31 Looked at normatively, the decision emanates from nothingness. The legal force of a decision is different from the result of substantiation. Ascription is not achieved with the aid of a norm; it happens the other way around. A point of ascription first determines what a norm is and what normative rightness is. A point of ascription cannot be derived from a norm, only a quality of a content. The formal in the specifically legal sense contrasts with this quality of content, not with the quantitative content of a causal connection. It should be understood that this last contrast is of no consequence to jurisprudence.
- 32 The law gives authority, said Locke, and he consciously used the word law antithetically to commissio, which means the personal command of the monarch. But he did not recognize that the law does not designate to whom it gives authority. It cannot be just anybody who can execute and realize every desired legal prescription. The legal prescription, as the norm of decision, only designates how decisions should be made, not who should decide.
- 33 In the absence of a pivotal authority, anybody can refer to the correctness of the content. But the pivotal authority is not derived from the norm of decision. Accordingly, the question is that of competence, a question that cannot be raised by and much less answered from the content of the legal quality of a maxim. To answer questions of competence by referring to the material is to assume that one’s audience is a fool.
- 33 The classical representative of the decisionist type (if I may be permitted to coin this word) is Thomas Hobbes. The peculiar nature of this type explains why it, and not the other type, discovered the classic formulation of the antithesis: autoritas, non Veritas facit legem. (Authority, not truth, makes the law.)
- 34 He illustrated this with one of those comparisons that in the unmistakable soberness of his healthy common sense, he knew how to apply so strikingly: Power or order can be subordinate to another just as the art of the saddler is subordinate to that of the rider; but the important thing is that despite this abstract ladder of orders, no one thinks of subordinating the individual saddler to every single rider and obligating him to obey.
- 34 In the independent meaning of the decision, the subject of the decision has an independent meaning, apart from the question of content. What matters for the reality of legal life is who decides. Alongside the question of substantive correctness stands the question of competence. In the contrast between the subject and the content of a decision and in the proper meaning of the subject lies the problem of the juristic form. It does not have the a priori emptiness of the transcendental form because it arises precisely from the juristically concrete. The juristic form is also not the form of technical precision because the latter has a goal-oriented interest that is essentially material and impersonal. Finally, it is also not the form of aesthetic production, because the latter knows no decision.
- the subjective in the chain of legal determination makes a formal system impossible.
    - another way to derive this is a probabilistic argument where it's highly unlikely that there have not been *any* contradicting rulings, and a contradiction --> law of explosion

# 3) Political Theology
- 36 All significant concepts of the modern theory of the state are secularized theological concepts not only because of their historical development—in which they were transferred from theology to the theory of the state, whereby, for example, the omnipotent God became the omnipotent lawgiver—but also because of their systematic structure, the recognition of which is necessary for a sociological consideration of these concepts. The exception in jurisprudence is analogous to the miracle in theology. Only by being aware of this analogy can we appreciate the manner in which the philosophical ideas of the state developed in the last centuries.
- 41 At the foundation of his identification of state and legal order rests a metaphysics that identifies the lawfulness of nature and normative lawfulness. This pattern of thinking is characteristic of the natural sciences. It is based on the rejection of all “arbitrariness,” and attempts to banish from the realm of the human mind every exception. In the history of the parallel of theology and jurisprudence, such a conviction finds its place most appropriately probably in J. S. Mill. In the interest of objectivity and because of his fear of arbitrariness, he too emphasized the validity without exception of every kind of law.
- 42 When Kelsen gives the reasons for opting for democracy, he openly reveals the mathematical and natural-scientific character of his thinking: 10 Democracy is the expression of a political relativism and a scientific orientation that are liberated from miracles and dogmas and based on human understanding and critical doubt.
- 44 trace a conceptual result back to a sociological carrier is psychology; it involves the determination of a certain kind of motivation of human action.
- 45 him. In its consequent manner this type of sociology is best assigned to belles-lettres;
- 45 Altogether different is the sociology of concepts, which is advanced here and alone has the possibility of achieving a scientific result for a concept such as sovereignty.
- 46 metaphysics is the most intensive and the clearest expression of an epoch.
- 46 Emile Boutmy, “Rousseau applies to the sovereign the idea that the philosophes hold of God: He may do anything that he wills but he may not will evil.”
- 46 According to Atger, “The prince develops all the inherent characteristics of the state by a sort of continual creation. The prince is the Cartesian god transposed to the political world.”
- 47 But the image of the architect and master builder of the world reflects a confusion that is characteristic of the concept of causality.
- 48 The general validity of a legal prescription has become identified with the lawfulness of nature, which applies without exception.
- 48 The general will of Rousseau became identical with the will of the sovereign; but simultaneously the concept of the general also contained a quantitative determination with regard to its subject, which means that the people became the sovereign. The decisionistic and personalistic element in the concept of sovereignty was thus lost.
- 49 the conception of God in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries belongs the idea of his transcendence vis-à-vis the world, just as to that period’s philosophy of state belongs the notion of the transcendence of the sovereign vis-à-vis the state.
- 49 All the identities that recur in the political ideas and in the state doctrines of the nineteenth century rest on such conceptions of immanence:
- 50 The main line of development will undoubtedly unfold as follows: Conceptions of transcendence will no longer be credible to most educated people, who will settle for either a more or less clear immanence-pantheism or a positivist indifference toward any metaphysics.
- 51 Marx and Engels never failed to recognize that this ideal of an unfolding self-conscious mankind must end in anarchic freedom. Precisely because of his youthful intuition, the utterance of the young Engels in the years 1842—1844 is of the greatest significance: “The essence of the state, as that of religion, is mankind’s fear of itself.”
- 51 the development of the nineteenth-century theory of the state displays two characteristic moments: the elimination of all theistic and transcendental conceptions and the formation of a new concept of legitimacy.

# 4) On the Counterrevolutionary Philosophy of the State (de Maistre, Bonald, Donoso Cortes)
- 55 state order. The two words infallibility and sovereignty were “perfectly synonymous.” 1 To him, every sovereignty acted as if it were infallible, every government was absolute—
- 55 this sentence there lies the clearest antithesis in the entire history of political ideas. All the anarchist theories from Babeuf to Bakunin, Kropotkin, and Otto Gross revolve around the one axiom: “The people are good, but the magistrate is corruptible.” De Maistre asserted the exact opposite, namely, that authority as such is good once it exists: “Any government is good once it is established,” the reason being that a decision is inherent in the mere existence of a governmental authority, and the decision as such is in turn valuable precisely because, as far as the most essential issues are concerned, making a decision is more important than how a decision is made.
- 57 The dogma of Original Sin promulgated by the Council of Trent is not radical in any simple way. In contrast to the Lutheran understanding, the dogma asserts not absolute worthlessness but only distortion, opacity, or injury and leaves open the possibility of the natural good.
- 59 him to remain on the throne, an inconsistency committed by deism when it excluded God from the world but held onto his existence (here Donoso Cortés adopted from Bonald the immensely fruitful parallel of metaphysics and the theory of the state). Although the liberal bourgeoisie wanted a god, its god could not become active; it wanted a monarch, but he had to be powerless; it demanded freedom and equality but limited voting rights to the propertied classes in order to ensure the influence of education and property on legislation, as if education and property entitled that class to repress the poor and uneducated; it abolished the aristocracy of blood and family but permitted the impudent rule of the moneyed aristocracy, the most ignorant and the most ordinary form of an aristocracy; it wanted neither the sovereignty of the king nor that of the people. What did it actually want?
- 61 Staat und Kirche” treated the many contradictions of constitutional liberalism, offered a very simple explanation: The hatred of monarchy and aristocracy drove the liberal bourgeois leftward; the fear of being dispossessed of his property, which was threatened by radical democracy and socialism, drove him in turn toward the right, to a powerful monarchy whose military could protect him. He thus oscillated between his two enemies and wanted to fool both.
- 62 definition of the bourgeoisie as a clasa discutidora and his recognition that its religion resides in freedom of speech and of the press are examples.
- 63 Just as liberalism discusses and negotiates every political detail, so it also wants to dissolve metaphysical truth in a discussion. The essence of liberalism is negotiation, a cautious half measure, in the hope that the definitive dispute, the decisive bloody battle, can be transformed into a parliamentary debate and permit the decision to be suspended forever in an everlasting discussion.
    - Political Romanticism
- 63 Dictatorship is the opposite of discussion.
- 65 Donoso Cortés always had in mind the final consequences of the dissolutions of the family resting on the authority of the father, because he saw that the moral vanished with the theological, the political idea with the moral, and all moral and political decisions are thus paralyzed in a paradisiacal worldliness of immediate natural life and unproblematic concreteness.
- 65 Today nothing is more modern than the onslaught against the political. American financiers, industrial technicians, Marxist socialists, and anarchic-syndicalist revolutionaries unite in demanding that the biased rule of politics over unbiased economic management be done away with. There must no longer be political problems, only organizational-technical and economic-sociological tasks. The kind of economic-technical thinking that prevails today is no longer capable of perceiving a political idea. The modern state seems to have actually become what Max Weber envisioned: a huge industrial plant. Political ideas are generally recognized only when groups can be identified that have a plausible economic interest in turning them to their advantage. Whereas, on the one hand, the political vanishes into the economic or technical-organizational, on the other hand the political dissolves into the everlasting discussion of cultural and philosophical-historical commonplaces, which, by aesthetic characterization, identify and accept an epoch as classical, romantic, or baroque. The core of the political idea, the exacting moral decision, is evaded in both.
- 66 Maistre said that every government is necessarily absolute, and an anarchist says the same; but with the aid of his axiom of the good man and corrupt government, the latter draws the opposite practical conclusion, namely, that all governments must be opposed for the reason that every government is a dictatorship.